Todd G. Buchholz in his book "New Ideas from Dead Economists", Todd G. Buchholz has walked the readers through the evolution of economics from Adam Smith, the Father of Economics, to modern economics. In his text, Buchholz gives a detailed explanation of the theories of other influential economists from modern times. Buchholz started the journey by introducing Adam Smith, who laid the foundation for classical economics, and his wonderful work in economics made him the father of modern economics. Some of the most important theories described were the concepts of the invisible hand, division of labour, Laissez-Faire Economics, and the role of government. Smith suggested that individuals working in their self-interest would unintentionally contribute to the economy as a whole since everyone is trying to maximize their productivity, and that will make the entire society productive. He gave some contrasting ideologies, such as asking for minimal government intervention and interestingly also defining some important tasks for the government, such as enforcing contracts, maintaining public goods and providing for national defence.
In his next chapter, Buchholz described Thomas Malthus, who is known for the Malthusian Trap. In his theory, he touches upon the fact that the population doubles every 25 years. However, food production does not keep pace with the population growth, explaining it in terms of exponential vs linear growth. Several predictions were also made by him suggesting future famines, wars, and plagues. This theory caused him a lot of criticism but also gave him support and attention from Prime Minister Pitt.
Another criticizer of Thomas Malthus was David Ricardo, a self-taught economist who is renowned for his work in international trade. Ricardo emphasized on free trade and the importance of specializing in goods where they have a comparative advantage over other countries. He was also an optimist who thought of Britain becoming the "workshop of the world". He also touches upon the topic of economic rent, where he explains that a landlord should be able to charge the rent according to the demand of the property and the quality of the land. This also led to another idea of Ricardo, the "Stationary State," which meant that economic growth stopped due to diminishing returns in agriculture, leaving capitalists and workers in a difficult situation.
The narrator then smoothly transitions to the next phase, where John Stuart Mill, who was introduced to classical economics by his father, James Mill, early in his life, came up with utilitarian principles, which emphasized maximizing overall happiness as a key factor in making economic decisions. Mill had diverse views, ranging from individual freedom to government intervention in some cases, such as labour protection, which could improve the living conditions of many more people. Mill also portrayed an impressionistic vision of the future where he thought humans would surpass the "realm of necessity" and strive to enhance humanity.
The next part of the journey the narrator is depicting is about Karl Marx, a person with an unconventional way of thinking; he brought labour exploitation and value surplus to the table which talked about how the capitalists made profits by not compensating the workers to the amount of value they put into the final product. The text also discusses his vision of a communist revolution where the working class, after exploitation, will overthrow the capitalists and bring communism. Some of the ideas he had were "withering away" from the state and forming a complete dictatorship. He also formulated a 10-point plan, which included measures like free education, centralization of credit, abolition of property on land, progressive income tax, etc. A
3
modern perspective is also discussed about how most of the mainstream economists dismiss Marx's ideas, although some of them still find value in some of his ideas.
The next part brings in a very important landmark, which is Neoclassical Economics. The narrator discusses the contributions of Alfred Marshall. Even though Marshall was not the inventor of Marginal analysis, he is described as a key figure in addition to the inventors of marginal analysis. Marshall made significant contributions to economic analysis, such as distinguishing between short and long runs, where he emphasized that the short run only allows for an increase in labour and raw materials. However, it would provide more time for building factories and new plants in the long run. A rebuttal of the Marxian labour theory of value was also noted, where Marshall rejected the theory by discussing various factors other than just labour to determine the cost of the product. Elasticity in economics was also discussed later and keyed to be very significant in measuring how price changes affect consumer behaviour and economic analysis. The degree of elasticity and its role in various fields, such as government policies, monopolies, and other scenarios, is discussed with the help of various examples.
Thorstein Veblen takes the stage in the next part, where his famous work, "The Theory of the Leisure Class", is discussed. He talks about how societal norms and emulation play a role in shaping economic behaviour. Veblen also criticized neoclassical economics for its mathematical abstractions (such as supply and demand) and the neglect of real-world institutions. Coase's theorem is also introduced in relation to economics in law, demonstrating that the initial assignment of property rights does not necessarily determine the ultimate use of property. The narrator also discusses the "Buchholz Hypothesis", which suggests a link between higher interest rates and increased crime rates.
The next part takes the readers into the 20th century, where John Maynard Keynes, a prominent economist from Cambridge, makes a contribution to the field of economics. The term "Keynesian" was brought into existence, emphasizing government intervention in the economy, such as taxation or stimulating demand to grow the economy. The causes, impact, and Keynes' responses to the Great Depression, where the United States saw a 50% drop in national income, a 23% increase in unemployment, and a halt in residential construction, are also described in detail. Keynes was described as focusing on the monetary policies from the 1920s and 1930s, as well as giving the multiplier effect. This meant that if a firm changes how they spend money, it leads to a snowball effect, leading to a larger change in national income.
Milton Friedman and monetarism came into action when Friedman challenged Keynesian ideas, emphasizing the importance of a stable money supply and the role of the Federal Reserve in economic management. Friedman also critiqued the multiplier effect, mentioning that government spending does not come without consequences and how that would lead to reduced private spending. Freidman's monetarism ideas gained momentum worldwide during the late 1970s when he was influencing central banks worldwide; one of his ideas was to control the money supply to stabilize the economy. Various tax policies, such as tax cuts, were also suggested to stimulate economic growth.
In the next phase, the contribution and rift between Keynes and Marx are discussed, where Keynes blames Marx for contributing nothing to economics and also gives his support for the government by "not to do things which individuals are doing already . . . but to do those things
4
which are at present not done at all." Another significant milestone was the political invisible hand by Keynes, which ensured a confluence between political self-interest and public good. However, soon after this, many criticisms came for Keynes as well, which said, "Even if Public Choice theory is only partially correct, Keynes still seems blind to the issues raised."
Coming to an end, Buchholz explores some contrasting theories, such as rational expectations, behavioural economics, and the new relationship between economists and Wall Street. The narrator has done an excellent job depicting the divided pasts where Wall Street considered economists too timid to engage in financial markets. However, economists contributed heavily with the Efficient market hypothesis (EMH), Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM), and Beta. These were some of the biggest contributions that posit that the stock price reflects all the information or changes in the market, and CAPM helps the investor calculate the riskiness of a stock.
Todd G. Buchholz's "New Ideas from Dead Economists" takes us from early economists to modern economists via this wonderful journey that links everything together. He discusses the most prominent names in economics, such as Adam Smith, Karl Marx, and John Maynard Keynes. The title "New Ideas from Dead Economists" does complete justice to the book since the book gives the readers several ideas from economists in the past, which tells us how the shaping of the current economic world took place